.TH "IPUPDATE" "8" "August 16, 2005" "" ""
.SH NAME
ipupdate \- ip update
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipupdate
[ \fB-c \fIconfig-file\fR ] [ \fB-i \fIip\fR|- ] [ \fIcommand\fR ]
.br
.B ipupdate
{ \fB-v\fR|\fB-h\fR }
.br
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBipupdate\fR daemon for updating the ip address on a dns server
that supports RFC2136 dns update.  When run without a command, the program
will just read the configuration file, updating any hosts as needed, and
immediately exit.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB-c \fIconfig-file\fR
Use \fIconfig-file\fR as the configuration file instead of the default,
\fI/etc/ipupdate.conf\fR.
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print brief commandline syntax information and exit.
.TP
\fB-i \fIip\fR|-
Do not attempt to find the public ip, use \fIip\fR instead. If a hyphen
is used instead of an ip address, then the ip, followed by a newline, will
be read from stdin
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Print version information and exit.
.SH "COMMANDS"
.TP
\fBstart\fR
Start the daemon.  The daemon will update all hosts as necessary every
5 minutes.  The daemon will NOT daemonize if the -i option is used.
.TP
\fBstop\fR
Stop the daemon and exit.
.TP
\fBrestart\fR
Stop the previous instance of ipupdate and start daemon mode with this one.
.TP
\fBcheck\fR
Check the syntax of the configuration file.  Load the config and print
verbose log parsing information. Exit with a return value of 0 if there
were no errors.
.SH "SECURITY"
.PP
The configuration file contains secret key information that you don't want just
anybody to see or use.  Make sure the configuration file is never world
readable.  Set the file owner and group so that only authorized persons can use
ipupdate to change the IP in configured zones.
.PP
Never configure dns servers to allow unsecured dynamic updates even if you use
IP based access control on the dns server.  Spoofing the source IP address in
UDP dynamic update requests in an anonymous fashion is relatively trivial to do.
The unsecured dynamic update feature is only intended to be used for dns servers
that don't support basic TSIG authentication (i.e. Microsoft DNS Server only
permits GSS-TSIG secured or unsecured updates). Even then, it should only be
used on a secure network where the dns server cannot be accessed by the internet.
If you allow unsecured dynamic updates, then there is significant risk that an
average dns hacker can change your IP address at will and spy on your website
activity in an unobvious fashion at worst or denial of service and embarrassment
at best.

.SH "FILES"
.TP
\fI/etc/ipupdate.conf\fR
The default location for the configuration file.
.TP
\fI/var/run/ipupdate.pid\fR
The default location for the process-id file that is created when the
daemon is started.  This location may be changed in the configuration
file.
.TP
\fI/var/log/ipupdate.log\fR
The default location for the log file.  This location may be changed in
the configuration file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fIRFC 2136\fR, \fBipupdate.conf\fR(5), \fBgetip\fR(7)
